---

title: "Agile vs Waterfall (Pandemic Edition)"
date: 2021-08-13 14:52:00:00 +00:00
author: scott
layout: post
image: 
icon: deep-fried
tags: Agile, Waterfall, Pandemic

---


When studying the Agile methodology, the Waterfall model (in which progress flows downwards through design, development and deployment until you reach product completion) is one that could be considered the elephant in the room when transitioning from a “traditional” project management approach to one such as Scrum (the continuous cycle of delivering progress). It’s one of the most frequently debated topics in the industry along with Windows vs Mac, Manual vs Automated or Front End vs Back End (and let’s not forget Full Stack). 

Surveys show that 93% of companies that had fully adopted an “agile” model before the pandemic were more successful than those that hadn’t. This demonstrates that successful as well as frequent product launches are essential with the economy struggling to get back on its feet as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic but exactly how has the Agile methodology helped businesses get through the past couple of years of lockdowns and working from home? Why is it worth transitioning from a Waterfall approach if you haven’t already done so?

## Adapting to Change

One thing that Agile is particularly well suited for is adapting to change with it being one of the four core values of the Agile methodology. With lockdowns impacting not just how we work but the work itself, companies have been left on the edge of their seats watching the news for restriction changes around the world. In the cinema industry, for example, seating restrictions and social distancing rules have been implemented and lifted numerous times throughout lockdown with many theatres being forced to close altogether, opening with a only few days notice to get ready with the new restrictions. 

With Agile, customer input is welcomed throughout the development process with effective communication being the key to staying on top of the ever changing restrictions. Reviewing the Product Backlog (the breakdown of work) on a regular basis makes it easier to prioritise tasks when these changes occur. This can result in new tasks entering the Sprint (a time-boxed period where work should be completed) and can sometimes alter the goals of a Sprint entirely. Using an “agile” approach such as Scrum makes this achievable over the Waterfall methodology due to the use of daily and weekly meetings like Stand Ups, Sprint Planning and Retrospectives that make sure everyone is aware of the ever changing requirements that are expected of them and ensures that everyone's voice is heard. 

## Self Organised Teams

The Agile Methodology promotes self organised teams who are responsible for assigning and tracking their own work and progress. This is beneficial to a business in a number of ways as it cuts down on the necessary resources and overhead that are often associated with  micro-managing. It also encourages developers to become more enthusiastic towards their work by creating a sense of ownership and introducing a happier working environment where employees feel trusted to get the job done. 

For self organised teams to succeed it is important to offer motivation and support through acknowledgment and recognition, team building exercises and introducing an element of fun to the workplace. In [The Boxoffice Company](https://company.boxoffice.com), for example, the employees have stayed motivated working from home by encouraging virtual movie nights, quizzes and making plans for a time where we can once again meet up for our annual BBQ. Prior to working from home, a fun office environment was introduced with table tennis and Mario Kart tournaments ensuring the workplace was always a welcome environment. 
Of course, with the Waterfall methodology there is nothing stopping you from encouraging a fun and relaxed environment but this can often feel a lot more like forced fun when the workload and ownership is delegated and ‘wins’ (such as product launches) are far and few between.
Take a moment to reflect on your current place of work. How well do they cope with change and communication? How do they encourage ownership and enthusiasm in the work that you do? What constitutes a win? No working environment is entirely perfect, especially one in the midst of a pandemic, but it is the drive to improve and adapt that makes them truly “agile”. 
